# The Death of Fionn Mac Cumhail

https://archive.org/details/zeitschriftfrc01meyeuoft/page/462/mode/1up?q=finn
Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie
by Meyer, Kuno, 1858-1919; Stern, Ludwig Christian, 1846-1911

Publication date 1897
Vol 1

p462-5
Kuno Meyer

THE DEATH OF FINN MAC CUMAILL.

The usual account of the death of Finn is that he was slain in battle against the Lúagni Temrach at Áth Brea on the Boyne by Aiclech mac Dubdrenn, who cut off his head. This is the account given by the tenth century poet Cinaed húa Hartacáin in the poem beginning *Fianna bátar i n-Emain* `[In the glossed copy of this poem in Egerton 1782, fo. 52 a. the lines "la fein Lúagne aided Find oc Ath Brea for Bóind " are glossed as follows .i. la Aiclech mac Duibreun dorochair Finn ac Ath Brea ós Boaind 7 ni a mBeola Broghoige a Luachair. This seems to refer to the existence of yet another version of the death of Finn, which must have been entirely different, as it places the event at so distant a place as Luachair in Munster.]` by Tigernach `[ See Stokes' edition in Rev. Celt. XVII, p. 21.]` and the Four Masters, `[The Four Masters (A. P. 2S3) add two stanzas, the first of which is identical with the quatrain quoted in the second Fragment below. It also occurs as an addition to Cinaed's poem in Egerton 1782, fo. 53b, 1: Eobith Finn dua, robith Finn, ba do goeib goniach guin, dothall Aicclech mac Duibrenn a chenn do mac Murni Muin. ]` and, with greater detail, in the tale entitled *Aided Finn* or 'The Violent Death of Finn ' `[Edited in Cath Finntrága pp. 72—76: translated in Silva Gadelica II, pp. 96—99.]` In this tale it is stated with some emphasis that the account there given is the true one: is i sin iarum Aided Finn iar firinne in senchasa amail adfiadat na heólaig ' that then is the Death of Finn according to the truth of history, as the learned relate'. So there were other versions.

One of these we can piece together from two scanty fragments, in which, I believe, we have the beginning and end of an *Aided Finn* story, while the connecting piece is lost. The first of these fragments I have already published on p. 76 of my edition of *Cath Finntrága*, though not quite correctly and without translation. It is found in the wellknown Bodleian codex Laud 610, fo. 122b. 2, where it follows immediately upon the above-mentioned version of *Aided Finn*. It breaks off with the end of the page. With fo. 123a a new layer of vellum and a different hand begin.

The second fragment is preserved in the British Museum MS. Egerton 92, fo. 6a, 1. It is much defaced and partly illegible.

The two fragments together make a fairly intelligible story. According to this, Finn in his old age, being forsaken by one after another of his *fiann*, who prefer service with the king of Tara, determines to put his remaining strength to the test by an attempt to leap across the Boyne at a spot which bore the name of *Léim Finn* or 'Finn's Leap'. He accordingly sets out from where he is in the west of Ireland, `[Somewhere in Munster, but no special place is mentioned.]` passes along the high road of Gowran in Kilkenny, till at Mullaghmast he meets a woman making curds. Here the first fragment ends. He probably asks this woman for a drink, and thereby in some way violates one of the gessa laid upon him. `[So does Cúchnlinn on the last day of his life by eating the flesh of a hound. See the story of his death in Rev. Celt. III, p. 176.]` The opening of the second fragment I think we can understand with the help of a passage in the other *Aided Finn*. It had been prophesied to Finn by his wife Smirgat `[ This is her name in Aided Finn (Cath Finntr. p. 74. I). In a poem in LL. p. 139a she is called Smirnat ("Little Marrow").]` that if he drank out of horns, his death would be nigh. It was therefore his custom always to drink out of cups. Now, in a place called Adarca Iuchba (the Horns of Iuchba) in Offaly he found a spring aud drank out of it. An old woman reminds him of the prophecy, and Finn acknowledges its truth. For the rest of the tale I refer the reader to my translation of the second fragment.

First Fragment. (Laud, fo. 122b, 2.)

Translation.

After old age had come to Finn the grandson of Baiscne, his men noticed it on him, and he did not dissemble. 'Why does he not stay', said they, 'near the king of Erin, and we should gather to thee.' 'I am well pleased', said he. Nine remain (with Finn). On the morrow one of them went with the *fiann*. Then another went, (and so on) until only one man was left (with Finn). ' 'Tis true then', said he, 'it is old age the men notice on me. I (shall) know that by my running and leaping, for it is in the east my 'Leap' is, even on the Boyne, and I shall go to its brink'. So he set out from the west on the high-road of Gowran into Mullaghmast. There in Mullaghmast he found a woman making curds...

Second Fragment. (Egerton 92. fo. 6a, 1).

Translation.

... up to this', said Finn ... said she ... prophecy ... that he would die when he should drink ... poison out of a horn.' 'True, O hag', said he. 'Here is my brooch for thee.' Then he went along the Boyne eastward until he reached his 'Leap'. Thereupon he fell between two rocks, so that his forehead struck against the rock and his brains were dashed about him, and he died between the two rocks. Fishermen of the Boyne found him. They were four. viz. the three sons of Urgriu, and Aiclech the son of Dubdriu. These found him. and Aiclech cut off his head. And the sons of Urgriu slew him (i. e. Aiclech). They took his (i. e. Finn's) head with them into an empty house, and boiled their fish, and divided it in two. His head was over against the fire. 'Give it a morsel', said a black evil-jesting man, 'since Aiclech is no more(?).' Three times the fish was divided in two, and still there were three portions, 'What is this?' said one of them. Then said the head from before the fire:

' 'Tis this that causes the third division with you, without any flattery, 
That my bit be given me by you at the meal...'

... as the historian says:

'Finn was slain, 
'Twas by spears, without a hero's (?) wound: 
Aiclech son of Duibdriu took off 
His head from the glorious son of Muin.'


[Also available as: https://celt.ucc.ie/published/T303003.html]


--

https://theses.gla.ac.uk/30591/

The death of Finn mac Cumaill
Maher, Martina (2018) The death of Finn mac Cumaill. PhD thesis, University of Glasgow.

Abstract
Finn mac Cumaill (Fionn Mac Cumhaill) has always been a popular figure in Gaelic tradition, coming to full prominence during the Early Modern period, as Fenian stories (tales of Finn and his fían, or fianna, known as fianaigecht in Old Irish and fiannaíocht in Modern Irish) become ever more popular in manuscript form. Despite the popularity that both Finn and the Finn Cycle have enjoyed in Gaelic literature, mentions of Finn's death are scant and tales recounting the event are even rarer. In the extant medieval Irish literature, the pinnacle of the corpus, Acallam na Senórach, not only holds the events in relative obscurity but its presentation of the circumstances of Finn's death may even be said to be conflicting. In looking at other tales in the fíanaigecht corpus, while we find a number of references to the fact than Finn dies, only a few depict his demise, namely Aided Finn and Tesmolta Cormaic ocus Aided Finn. To this short list of narratives detailing Finn's death and the events preceding it, we can add the tale designated 'The Chase of Síd na mBan Finn and the Death of Finn' (henceforth 'The Chase') preserved in a single manuscript, London, British Library, MS Egerton 1782. Although the tale breaks off with Finn still alive, albeit weary and bloodied and standing alone encircled by his adversaries, his death is a logical next element in the narrative, not least because there is repeated mention of a prophecy of his demise throughout the tale. This tale, which spans eight manuscript pages, seems to be the longest engagement with the idea of Finn's death in the medieval and Early Modern Irish corpora, yet has been the subject of very little scholarly investigation to date. This regrettable lacuna in scholarship on Fenian literature is the starting point for this thesis, which presents a three-pronged investigation of 'The Chase'.

Following a fuller introduction to the topic in Chapter 1, the history of the manuscript is examined afresh in Chapter 2 as new evidence, particularly from the works of the scribe Muiris Ó Gormáin, has shed new light on the manuscript's history and on the tale of 'The Chase'. This is then employed to examine the section of the manuscript in which 'The Chase' is to be found, a section consisting of four tales thought to be from the now lost manuscript, Cín Dromma Snechtai, and four fíanaigecht tales. It is investigated if the unit may be considered a deliberate anthology and whether thematic and/or other concerns motivated the unit's compilation.

Next, the study turns to the tale of 'The Chase' itself, examining its place within a continuum of traditions found in Old, Middle and Early Modern Irish treatments of Finn's death. Based on my own linguistic work on 'The Chase', a semi-diplomatic edition of which is included as an appendix to this thesis, it is demonstrated in Chapter 3 that the author of 'The Chase' seems to have been aware of several accounts of Finn's death, either those which are now extant or sources akin to them, and sought to bring together many of the elements present in other accounts of Finn's death in a single tale, perhaps in what was intended to be a comprehensive death tale for Finn. The various elements of the tale which resonate with the event of or events leading up to Finn's death, however, have not merely been cobbled together. Rather it is illustrated that the composition skilfully treats of the themes of death, prophecy and youth versus age, making regular allusion to the audience's presumed knowledge of other tales of the Fenian corpus, while adhering to the norms of earlier written fíanaigecht literature, a trait not always found in Early Modern tales of the Finn Cycle.

The last study which forms part of this thesis, Chapter 4, arose from the recognition that although 'The Chase' appears to be the longest extant engagement with Finn's death, there exists no study that details what material on Finn's death has circulated in the modern period. This section provides a comprehensive overview of modern engagements with Finn's death in post-1650 manuscripts and folklore collections. All the modern accounts that I have found to date in which Finn's death is recounted or in which it is presumed that Finn is dead, which are usually mentions of Finn's grave, are therefore identified, presented, and where applicable, translated. While it becomes clear that no other engagement with Finn's demise across the eleven centuries during which his death excited the Gaelic imagination is as long or as complex as 'The Chase', common or notable motifs in the modern accounts are identified, and similarities between the different treatments of Finn's death in the modern narratives are discussed. It is shown that a small number of the motifs and events treated in the medieval accounts of Finn’s death and in 'The Chase' are also treated in the modern tales of his demise, thus indicating some thematic continuity between medieval and modern approaches to relating how Finn died. With this in mind, some further relationships between the modern accounts of Finn's death and other medieval and modern Fenian literature are explored.

---

https://archive.org/details/folklore17folkuoft/page/426/mode/2up?q=%22finn%27s+leap%22
Folklore
by Folklore Society (Great Britain)
XVII 
1906

THE EUROPEAN SKY-GOD.
VII. THE CELTS {continued).

p427...

BY ARTHUR BERNARD COOK.

p433-4

...

Mr. O'Kearney, commenting on the tale, `[Transactions of the Ossianic Society for 1854 ii. 130 n. 6, cp. 30 f.]` says: ' There is a tradition extant which ascribes the cause of Fionn's death to his neglect of performing that annual rite or duty, and another which records his death in attempting to leap over the dark terrific chasm, after having neglected to do so till after the expiration of a year and a day. There is a deep glen called Gleanu Dealgain the (Glen of the river Dealgan), in the county of Waterford, about three miles distant from the town of Dungarvan, on the Waterford road, where it is traditionally related that Fionn Mac Chumhaill made an extraordinary leap on every Mayday morning. The stupendous depth of the place is fearful to behold when compared with the narrow expanse at the top ; and it is said that Fionn was under a geasa (pledge) to leap this glen forwards and backwards before sunrise on the mornings of May-day ; but that on a certain morning, as he was on his way to make the leap, he met a red-haired woman milking cows on the way-side, from whom he asked a drink, which she sternly refused, not knowing who it was that asked her for it. When Fionn found his request refused, he foresaw that his days were numbered, and he cursed the red-haired woman ; but nevertheless he made towards the glen, which he leaped forward ; but in leaping it backwards he fell into the glen, and the imprint of his hands, knees, etc., are still visible on a greenish stone, which lies in the bottom of the glen.' `[Transactions of the Ossianic Society for 1854. ii. 130 n. 6, cp. 30 f. ]` This yearly trial was, if I mistake not, the superannuation test of a woodland king.



---
https://archive.org/details/cu31924027086911/page/n35/mode/2up?q=%22Transactions+of+the+Ossianic+Society%22+1854
Transactions of the Ossianic Society 

Vol 2, 1854

p30-1
...

when they were admitted, Conan welcomed them, and bade them be seated, and then asked Fionn to favour him with the names by which he had been known in early life ; the Fenian chief [i.e. Fionn mac Cumhail] complied, and informed him that his first name had been Glasdiogan, his second, Giolla an Chuasain ; but that he was known by that name because his clothing consisted only of the skins of the deer and other wild beasts. Conan, after having thanked him for the information, requested him under penalty of *geasa* (prohibition), to inform him on what account he leaped the chasm of Brige Bloighe once a year. Fionn stated that the day he separated from his foster-mother, Boghmuin, when she had been slain by the clan of Moirne, he lost his way, but at length found himself at Luachair Dheaghaidh in the south. Here he saw two assemblies, one of fair ladies, and the other composed of men : the assemblies were each on a cam, while a deep wide chasm in the mountain separated them. He went to the crowd of ladies, and enquired the cause of the meeting. He was speedily informed that Seadna, son of the king of Kerry-Luachra, had fallen in love with Danat, daughter of Daire, from Sith-Daire, but that the lady refused to marry him unless he engaged to leap this chasm once a year during his life time. Fionn having seen that the prince baulked at the leap, when he reached the margin of the precipice, enquired whether or not the princess would marry another if he would make the leap. Having been answered in the affirmative, he tucked up his deer skin garments and leaped the chasm, not only forward, but backwards as well. The princess bound him under geasa, (prohibition), to perform the leap once a year. We have so many localities in Ireland distinguished for leaps equally as extraordinary aa that of Fionn, that we cannot easily separate the circumstances of those leaps from some obsolete Pagan rite. Leim na Con (Loophead), in the southern extremity of the county of Clare, and the various Leim an eich (steed's leaps), throughout the country, strongly warrant this opinion. There are footprints left by the steed generally on a rock to mark the extent of the leap, and these marks are believed to be of the remotest antiquity. If we cannot connect Fionn's leaps over the wide chasm with the labor of Hercules, when he separated the mountain by the strength of his arms, we can at least, in someway, connect the mysterious footprints with such as those on Adam's Peak in the island of Ceylon.

The history of Boghmuin, as told by tradition, which singularly enough localises it to several places in each province of Ireland, is really mythological. The tradition prevalent among the people on the north eastern coasts runs thus. When Fionn had reached his seventh year, Boghmuin, who, up to that time, was doubtful what name to give her foster-son, introduced him among the youth of the clan of Moirne while

---

https://archive.org/details/feistighechonai00unkngoog/page/n122/mode/1up
THE FESTIVITIES AT THE HOUSE OF CONAN OF CEANN-SLEIBHE.
Trans Ossianic Society
pp.119-

p124

The porter thereupon returned : Couan asked him the quality and description of the parties at the gate. " There is," replied he, " a young, courteous, fair-haired, manly, puissaat, truly handsome hero, powerful in action, whose shape and counteoajice b formed ia beauty's mould ; he is the largest of heroes, the most powerful of champions, and the most beautiful of the human race; be leads a ferocious, small-headed, white-breasted, sleek-baunched hound, having the eyes of a dragon, the claws of a wolf, the vigor of a lion, the venom of a serpent angered to speedy action, by a massy chain of old silver attached to a collar of brightly-burnished gold around his neck. There is another brown-haired, ruddy-faced, white-toothed man with the former: he isJeading a yellow-spotted hound by a chain of bright brass, which he holds in hia hand."

" It is a good description you have given of them," said Conan, " as I thereby know them : for he is Fionn O'Boisgne, the Fenian prince whom you first (described), and it is Bran he leads ; the other man is Diorraing son of Domhardamadli, and it is Sceoluing he leads in his hand. Hasten to admit them." They were therefore accordingly admitted, and received with great respect. Their arms were received out of their hands, and a sumptuous feast was prepared for them, so that they enjoyed themselves pleasantly and happily on the occasion.
Conan was situated as follows : — his wife sat by his shoulder on one side, while his elegantly. moulded, gracefully-mild daughter, named Finn-dealbh, sat on the other. The appearance of the young girl was truly astonishing; for fairer than the pure snow of one night was every limb of her body and her graceful neck ; her cheeks glowed with as deep a crimson as dyes the blood of a young heifer ; both her brows were dark as the sheen of jet ; her long tendrilled hair shone like pure burnished gold ; her eyes, blue as the flower of the lugha, glistened like pearls in their sockets ; redder than the berry of the mountain ash were her sweetly -sounding, correctly-speaking lips J and an elegant, fine, four-cornered 
mantle, boiuid above her fair breast with a bodkin of bright silver, enveloped her.
At length, Fiona addressing Conan, said, " O Conan, it is very true that the malice you entertain towards me is great indeed; nevertheless, you may remember the time when I saved yourself and your wife from death, and that we then cemented a bond of friendship between us to this effect:-» your wife was then with child, and you promised me the gift of the infant, on condition that if it proved to be a boy, he should be enrolled in the Fenian ranks; but if it should be ft girl, yon were bound to educate her in a befitting manner for me, so that if she proved duly qualified, I should take her to wife; if not, I should bestow her on some Fenian chief among my people. I can now perceive she is quite befitting myself, and, therefore, it is to claim her I am come, and not to seek hospitality from you." " Cease, O Fionn," said Conan, " for you do not esteem your own worth more than does the man to whom that maid is betrothed." "Who is he?" enquired Diorraing. "Fatha Mac Abhric, son of the king of Eaeroe," replied Conan. "On yourself be the fault of your wounds and danger," cried Diorraing ; " that glib, ill-spoken tongue, which has given expression to such uncalled-for words, should be silenced and cut out, and the potion of a guilty death doled out to you ; for were all the worth of the Tuatha Dedaiians concentrated in the body of one man, Fionn would prove a better man than he." " 13e silent, Diorraing," said Fionn, " for we have not come here to commit a carnage, but to get a wife, and we shall have her, no matter whether the Tuatha Dedanans Uke or dislike it." "I do not mean to hold a contention or quarrel with you," said Conan, " but I bind you 139
undev ffetua vhkh 'true heroes never woold bear/ if yoa do not answer, to the best of yonr meiDorj, all the questions I will propose." " I will answer them," replied Tionn. "Well then," said Conan, "Tell me the first and second names by which you have been known; abo the name of the place where yon first swam (bathed), what was the first booty you took, and why yon made the leap of Brice Bloighe every year." " I will tell (all) those, Conan," said Fioun. "Glasdioghnin was my first name ; T was afterwards known by the name of Giolla-an-chuBsain J it was in the fountain of Crithinn, hy the side of Sliabh Smoil, that I first swam j a widgeon and her clutch of twelve young birds, which I captured at Dun-Boi, which is now called Dun-da-bhrugha in the south, was the first booty that I took. The reason why I am bound to make the leap of Brice Bloighe every year is this : — The first day I separated from Boghmuin, my foster-mother, when she had been Blain by the dan of Moime, I lost mj way, and atrayed to Laachar Degbadh in the sonth. I wore no other clothing at the time, but a garment made of the skins of tbe deer and roebuck ; and I was then called l^ another name alao, that is GiolIa-na-g-Croiceann. I sair two different assembliea met on two high earns opposite each other : one was an assembly of comely men, and the other was composed rf beautiful blooming women : there was a high terrific precipice on each side, and a windy, formidable valley between. I proceeded to the female assembly, and enquired the reason why they assumed that separate position. They informed me that Seadna Mac Cairrioll, son of Criomthann, ling of Keiry Luachra, was seized by % current of affection and a torrent of deep love towards Douait, daughter of Daire of Sith Daire ; and that the condition she required of him was to leap (over the valley) every year, but that when he came to the brink of the precipice he baulked the leap. I enquired if she would accept the hand of anjr other person who would perform the leap; she replied that she never saw a man who wore worse clothiDgthan I did; but she found no fault with mj personal appearance ; and she said that if I would make the leap, she would accept me. Thereupon, I tucked iDjaelf up in the midst of my skins, then proceeding to the steep behind me, I took my race to thd margin of the precipice, and sprang over in a truly swift, scieutiSc manner to the opposite side. I then made a second leap back, and coold have leaped over it oftener, if I bad chosen. Donait, thereupon, came to meet me : she threw her arms around my neck, and thrice kissed me. She stripped me of my skins, gave me fit clothing, and brought me to her own house that night. As I arose early the next morning, she bound me under an obligation to perform that leap every year. So, Conan," said Fionn, " there is your question answered."

`This was a rather cDrions ffeat which the feir one required from her Iotct; the thing sarours much more of some old pagan rite, than of any rational demand. This is the more likely when we bear in mind the traditions assoeinted with so many localities where extraordinary leaps are aaid to hare been made ; anch are onr 16|n) » ij-eic, (steed's leap), I6inj CbufcnU|rjt] (CuchuUainn's leap, at Loop Head). &a., and the wonderful leap made by the giant in our text, over the arm of titt *ea*t Hdwth, when pnrsned by Fionn and the Fenlana. But if an/ ISlbeen Blain by the dan of Moime, I lost mj way, and atrayed to Laachar Degbadh in the sonth. I wore no otber dothing at the time, but a garment made of the skins of tbe deer and roebuck ; and I was then called l^ another name alao, that is GiolIa-na-g-Croiceann. I sair two different assembliea met on two high earns opposite each other : one was an assembly of comely men, and the other was composed rf beautiful blooming women : there was a high terrific precipice on each side, and a windy, formidable valley between. I proceeded to the female assembly, and enquired the reason why they assumed that separate position. They informed me that Seadna Mac Cairrioll, son of Criomthann, ling of Keiry Luachra, was seized by % current of affection and a torrent of deep love towards Douait, daughter of Daire of Sith Daire ; and that the condition she required of him was to leap (over the valley) every year, but doubt, u b> the mjtliic nature of the traauctioii, ewst«d, the solemn injuaclion impoied upon Konn to perform the leap every year, would entirely remove it. There it a tradition extant which aacribeB the cauie of Fionn'a death to his neglect of performing that snnnal ilte or duty, and knother which records his death in attempUog: to leap over the dark, terridc chasm, after having neglected to do *o till after the ezpiiation of a fear and a day. There is a deep glen cMedGUannDealgain the(Glea of the river Dealgan), in the county of Waterford, about three milei distant from Qie town of Dnngarvan, on the Waterfbrd road, where It is traditionally related that Fiona Mac Chumhaill made an ettraorditmir leap on every May-day uoraiog. The stupendous depth of the place is fearful to behold when compared with the narrow expanse at the topj and it is said that Fionn was uniler a geata (pledge) to leap this Glen forwards and backwards before sunrise on the mornings of Mayday ; hnt that on a certain morning, as he was on his way to make the leap, he met a red.haired womaa milking cows on the way-side, from whom he aaked a drink, which she sternly refused, not knowing who it was that asked her for it. When Fionn Cbund hia request refused, he foresaw that his days were numbered, and he cursed the red-haired woman ; bat nevertheless he made towards the glen, wliich he leaped forward ; bnt In leaping it backwards he fell into the glen, and the imprint of Ids hands, knees, Ac., are still visible on a greenish stone, which ties In the bottom of the glen. Fiuu this circumstance it is s.-tid and bdleved by the pea ■antrj that it U anluckjr to meet a red-hii[red voman, before an; one tiae, in tbe morning ; and we knew many people, who, if a red-haired woman be theflnt penon tbej meet in the morning, will tnrn homeand defer their journey to the next day, even if their business be of the greatest importance.`


`Erie was a fine paid either in money or goods, for an alleged trespass or loss. According to the old lawa tlie penalty of death, due to the law by a murderer, was allowed to be commuted to an eric or fine, to be paid to the next of kin of the mardered. Hence, tliis man wa« demaodinKirie for the death of hit father.`